Now that we've
discussed the splitting
phase and the various factory
methods that are used there,
and we've also discussed
the applying phase
and the various intermediate
operations that are used there,
it's time to turn our attention
to the combining phase
and the terminal operations
that are used there
in the Java Streams framework.
In this part of
the lesson, we'll
discuss the structure
and functionality
of stream terminal operations.
These operations apply
to both sequential
and parallel streams.
So for now, we're
just going to be
focusing on sequential streams.
We'll also continue to
showcase a simple search stream
program, using it as our
running application example.
Every stream finishes with one
and only one terminal operation
that yields a non-stream
result. Looking, for example,
back at our Hamlet
program from before,
you can see that it ended up
with the forEach() terminal
operation, that was used to
print out all the matching
characters that had been
properly sorted and uppercased
and filtered.
The key thing to remember
is there can only
be one of these terminal
operations in a given stream,
and you have to provide it.
Otherwise, nothing
will ever happen.
There are two
different categories
of stream operations.
Some upstream
terminal operations
have no values at all.
forEach() and forEachOrdered()
have that property.
These methods only
have side effects.
They don't return any value.
Here's the example once
again, just for consistency,
showing how to use forEach()
to print out the results
of our Hamlet program.
Then there's also a
pair of operations
that return the result of
something known as a reduction.
And these, of course, include
the collect() and reduce()
terminal operations.
These collect() and reduce()
terminal operations work
seamlessly with both sequential
and parallel streams.
We'll see the parallel
streams version a bit later.
One of the other things a
terminal operation does,
whether it be forEach(),
forEachOrdered(), reduce(),
or collect(), is it triggers all
of the intermediate operation
processing, basically
setting the wheels in motion,
as it were.